What was your feeling on that morning of nine 11?
Who did this?
Isn't that it's not a natural feeling that is coupled with fear of
what's next, especially when you're in DC, but also who is this?
Is this an accident? Is this a deliberate terrorist attack?
Is this a domestic, like,
what were your thoughts of the options and the internal ranking given here? Um,
expertise. Yeah.
I suppose I was taken by the narrative that this was international.
I mean,
I I'd also lived in New York during one of the first bombings in 94 of the world
trade center.
So it was clear to me that a radical community had really fixed New York as part
of their imagination of, and I immediately thought it was, uh, it was, uh,
a kind of blow to American power. And, you know,
I was drawn by the symbolism of, of, uh, you know, if you think of it as an act,
it was a kind of, um, an act of speech, if you will,
kind of a way of speaking to,
from a position of relative weakness, speaking to an Imperial power.
And that I saw, I saw it as a kind of symbolic, you know, speech act of,
of that with horrific, you know, real world, um,
consequences for all as innocent victims for the firearm police and just, uh,
you know, the horror of the moment. Um, so I, I,
I didn't see it as is transcending the United States,
but I did not see it as really having anything necessarily to do fundamentally
about Afghanistan and the history of the region that I'd been studying in the
committee. People that I knew who were not particularly religious, right.
That the guys I hung out with actually wore me out because they wanted to go out
every night. They wanted to party every night we had drinking. Yep.
We had discussions about alcohol. I mean,
it was like a Stalin is famous for its drinking. It's drinking, you know, it's.
I look forward to it. So I, I do want to travel to that part of the world.
When was the last time you were in that part of the world?
Early two thousands? Well, when they met two thousands tens. Okay.
So, uh, by the way, we're drinking vodka, what what's the per.
This is based on has incorporated vodka as, as the, um,
the choice. Um, and I, it, it informs, you know, and it's, but,
but the fascinating thing, you know,
and as a student is what you're observing as a non Muslim, you know,
I'm a non Russian, um, this is all, you know,
culturally new to me, um, you know, a student a while that right,
as a grad student doing my work there.
You're like the Jane Goodall, a vodka and Russia just observing.
That's. Right. Yeah. Yeah. And then you, you get,
you get the stomach on the grass vodka, you get, you know, I have,
I've had some long nights on the Kazakhstani frontier that I'm not proud of.
Um, you.
Know, but you got to know that people and some of them.
Actually, so that sort of thing, I mean, the, the,
the fascinating thing there was that, and just as a, I mean, there's a whole,
yeah, I'm gonna stop worrying, but there,
there are great contributions by anthropologists and
doggies who who've gone across the planet and try to understand how Muslims
understand the attrition, a different contexts.
So many use banks will say, you know, um,
this is part of our national culture to drink any as we please, right.
And yet I'm a very devout Muslim.
And so of course you can encounter other Muslim communities who won't touch
alcohol. Right. But it's become kind of, I think it's very much, um, you know,
Soviet culture left a deep impression in each of these places.
And so there are ways of thinking ways of, uh,
performing ways of joining oneself that are shared across
Soviet inform of Soviet space to this day. Right. Yeah.
And you've written also about Muslims in the Soviet union. Uh,
the there's an article that a, there was a paywall,
so I couldn't read it and I really want to read it is.
I'll sharing with you.
Um, Moscow and the mosque or something like that. Right. Um,
by the way, just another tangent on a tangent. Yeah. Uh,
so I bought all your books. I love them very much.
One of the reasons I bought them and read many parts is because they're easy
to buy. Unlike articles,
every single website has a payroll. So it's very,
very frustrating to read brilliant scholars such as yourself. Um,
I wish there was one fee I could pay everywhere.
I don't care what that fee is because it allows me to read some of your.
No, I don't think you're hearing. No.
I think moving towards more kind of open source for money stuff,
I think is what a lot of generals are thinking about now.
And I think it's definitely further kind of democratization of knowledge and
scholarship.
That's definitely an important thing that we should all think about.
And I think, um, you know,
we need to exert pressure on these publishers to do that.
So I appreciate this is what I'm doing here. Yeah. Good, good.
And I appreciate it.
So, uh, so your thought was, Afghanistan is not good.
It's not going to be the center course. Okay.
It's not the center of this and evade that country isn't gonna fix.
Isn't gonna fix the toxic maelstrom of politics that produced
nine 11. Right. I can just think of some,
the personalities to thinking about going back to the Tashkent story,
which I'll end with, I mean, just observing, you know, real Muslims doing,
doing things, and then asking questions about it and,
and trying to understand through their eyes, what tradition means to them.
And then, you know, you have, uh, we had,
we had a very narrow conversation about what Islam is that, you know,
generated immediately exploded in, you know, on the day of nine 11. Right. Um,
and then of course, um, I think the antipathy toward Islam and Muslims,
you know, it was formed by, by racism informed by xenophobia.
So it became a perfect storm. I think of demonization that didn't sit with,
you know,
what I knew about the tradition and with actual people that I had known,
because I'm going back to, I mean,
there were other friends and encounters and so on,
but just thinking about Afghanistan and, and it, for a moment, I mean,
just the thought of my friends who had been,
who had suffered a great deal in their short lives.
Who've been cast aside from country to country,
but had found a place in Tashkent with some relative stability.
And they wanted to go out every night. And, you know, they explained, you know,
one friend we, we talked about about the alcohol and all that, and he,
he didn't get crazy, but he was like, you can drink, but just don't get drunk.
That's, that's permissible within Islam. Right. Um, and he was,
you know, I think Pashtoon, I think he was back, had a different view, you know,
often the more vodka the better. Yeah.
And it doesn't violate as I understand Islam. So even yet,
it's kind of a silly example,
but it's just an illustration of the ways in which different communities,
different generations, different people can come at this very complex,
rich tradition in some different ways.
So obviously if whatever kind of scholar you are, any kind of expert,
whatever your, you know,
it's always disconcerting to see your field of specialization be flattened,
right. And then be flattened in the,
be turned to arguments for violence.
With the natural human feelings of hate and, uh.
And pain. So I, you know, I mean that day, I, I vividly remember, I sat with,
um, other PhD historians in different fields. We, you know,
we oddly enough had lunch that day and it kind of deserted Washington,
some place was opened. We went, um, and we just thought, you know,
this is going to kind of open up like a great mall of destruction
and, you know,
the American state is going to destroy and it's going to
destroy in this geography.
And I thought that was misplaced for lots of reasons. And then I think if, when,
you know, I'd been doing some research on I've kind of signed,
then I was kind of shifting south. And I had been looking at the top on, um,
from afar for some years. And, you know,
I think it's clear now that in retrospect,
there were opportunities for alternative policies at that moment.
So what should the conversation have been like,
what should we have done differently? Because,
you know,
from a perspective of the time the United States was invaded
by a, a foreign force, what is the proper response or the,
what is the proper conversation about the popper as part of the time?
Yeah.
I know my colleague at Sanford Condoleezza rice would tell me this is above my
pay grade. And, um, you know,
she makes a point in your classes to talk about how difficult decision-making is
under such intense pressure. And I appreciate that. Um, you know,
I am a historian who sits safely in my office. I don't like battlefields.
I don't like taking risks. Um, so I can see all those limits.
I'm not a military expert.
I've been accused of being a spy wherever I've gone because of the way I look
and because of my nationality and so on, but not a spy. So I differ, you know,
I respect the expertise of all those communities,
but I think they acted out of ignorance. They acted, I think because, I mean,
if you think of the,
in a way there was a compensatory aspect of this decision making, I mean,
the Bush administration failed, this is an extraordinary failure, right?
So if we start to.
Weigh, if we're coming back.
Down the of intelligence, I mean, if they,
if you follow the story of Richard Clarke, um, who's Richard Clark.
He was a national security expert who was tasked with following Al-Qaeda,
who had, uh,
produced a dossier under the Clinton ministration that he passed on to the
George W. Bush administration. And if you look at the work of Condoleeza rice,
she wrote a very famous, I think, unpaid Wald, uh,
foreign affairs article that you can read announcing the George W.
Bush foreign policy, you kind of outlook. Um, and it was all about great powers.
It's about the rise of China is about Russia. I mean,
there's definitely a kind of hangover of those who
missed having Russia as the boogeyman who spoke, you know,
the Clinton station repeated again, again,
the idea of making sure the bear stayed in his cage, um,
which is why the United States through a lifeline to the central Asian
states, hoping to have pipelines,
hoping to shore up their national sovereignty as a way of containing
Russia initially. Uh, but also Iran, you know, which sets to the south and west,
and then perfectly looking down the road to China, to the east. So the, the.
There is what like Russia,
or is it kinda like some weird combination, Russia, Iran and China.
The bear is Russia and Russia is this I'm thinking I'm
trying to characterize the imagination of some of these bachelor figures. Um,
this is an image formed in the cold war. I mean,
it has deeper seeds and European and Western intellectual thought that go back
at least to the 1850s and the reign of Tsar Nicholas. The first,
when we first get this language about, um,
the Russian empire is this kind of evil, uh, polity,
obviously this was a kind of pillar of Reaganism. Um,
but the Clinton folks kept that alive, alive. They wanted to make sure that,
you know,
American power would be unmatched and they being creatures of
Colbert themselves. They look to Russia as a recession power. Well,
before Putin was even thought of.
You mentioned one deep, uh, profound historical piece,
and Rambo is probably, uh, the whole, this,
this conflict has to do with another Selessa thumb movie of Rocky four,
which is also historically accurate and based on as basically a documentary.
So, um, there, there is something about the American power,
even at the level of Condoleezza rice, these respected, uh,
deep kind of, uh,
leaders and thinkers about history in the future where they like
to have competition with other superpowers and almost, uh,
conjure up superpowers,
even when those countries don't, maybe at the time,
at least deserve the label of superpower.
That's right. Good point. Yeah. They're all LLS and points. So yeah, I mean,
Russia was, I think many, many experts will be my, my mentor at Princeton. Um,
Stephen Hawkin was then writing great things about how, you know,
if you look at Russia's economy, the scale of its GDP, you know,
its capacity to actually add globally, it's all quite limited. Um,
but Connie rice and the people around her, you know,
came into power with George W. Bush thinking that, you know,
the foreign policy challenges of her era would be those of the past, right.
But your Clark and others within the ministration mourn that in fact,
there is this group that is declared war against United States,
and they are coming for us.
The FBI had been following these people around for many months. So, you know,
by the time George W. Bush comes to power, lots of Alcott activists are well,
not lots, but, you know, uh, perhaps a dozen or so are already, you know,
training in the United States. Right. Um,
and what we knew immediately from the biographies of some of the characters of
the attackers of nine 11, it was a hodgepodge of people from across the planet,
but most of them were Saudi, right.
And that was known very early on or presumed very on. So again,
if we go back to your big question about the geography, why Afghanistan, it,
it didn't add up, right.
It seemed to me that Afghanistan was a kind of soft target.
It was a place to have explosions to seemingly
recapture American supremacy. Um, and also I think, you know,
there was in many quarters, there was, uh,
a deep urge for revenge and this was the place to have some casualties,
have some explosions. And then I think, you know,
restore the legitimacy of the Bush administration by showing that we are in
charge, we will pay, I think it was a very old fashioned punitive dimension,
which rest upon the presumption that if we intimidate these people they'll know
not to try this again. Right. All these, I would suggest are all misreadings of,
uh, of an organization that was always global. It had no real center. I mean,
it called itself the center that's one way to translate all kinda,
but that center was really any imagination. Um,
bin Laden bounced around from country to country. Um, and crucially, I think,
uh, I'd mentioned that I don't claim to know anything new about,
but his endured as a kind of doubt is the role of Saudi Arabia.
And the fact that, you know, the muscle in that operation of nine 11 was,
was howdy, right? I mean, this was a Saudi operation with, if one thinks again,
just on the basis of nationalities, Saudis, and adoption, or two 11,
these guy and the Egyptian guy had been studying in Germany.
He was an urban planner.